In this lecture, you'll learn about model driven programmability with young Netco restaurant on Gypsy
to day, a model is well understood and agreed upon method to describe something.
You can also see this being described as a schema as well.
So it's a way that the is laid out and organized.
In the example here, you can see how a car dealership would maybe have their database laid out so that
they are a model for what you can see here.
The top level, we've got the mic, which includes the idea for the mique, which is an integer, meaning
it's a number and the name, which is variable and characters up to 45 cottagers.
We've also got the model of car with the model ID, which is an integer again, then the idea and also
the name for the model.
And we've got the trem or specifications of the car which has got the trim ID, the model, ID the name.
And the year to date model is just the recognized and agreed upon way that your data is going to be
laid out and organized.
Young stands for yet another next generation.
It was standardized by the IETF in 2010, and so they are modeling language, which provides a standardized
way to represent the operational and configuration of a network device.
So for using remote devices to interact with our network devices, to be able to pull information from
them and push information from them.
The client, which is the API, which is working with the network debate on the server, which is the
network device itself, they need to have a standardized format for data to be laid out in.
And Yang is commonly used for what is an open standard used by different network device vendors.
It can be used both internally on the device as a way of describing all its components on features and
also when packaged for transmission, for example, when interacting with an API.
So looking at the young format at the top, we've got the module name and you can see here, this is
standard IETF module, which describes the networked devices interfaces.
Then we've got a couple of containers under there.
The first container describing the interfaces.
It includes information like the name, the description type, wherever it's enabled or not.
And then we've got another container for the interface, which includes information like the name,
again, the type, the admin and operational status, et cetera.
So that is how the young format is laid out.
The configuration and operational status of a network device is components and services can be remotely
read or written to Netco Restaurant Conference RPG, our APIs, which describe the protocols and methods
for transport of network management data.
So looking at the model driven programmability stock on our network device, we've got things like interfaces,
also its features like BGP, KUOW, et cetera.
And then we've got the modules there which are which can be standard, such as the IETF interfaces that
you just saw, but can also be vendor specific modules as well, because maybe you've got a particular
network device which has got features on there are specific to that device.
When not case with vendor would have a vendor specific module and they are going to be laid out into
modules which describe the configuration and also the operational status as well.
So we've got our young data models that resides on the device.
And if we want to interact with our informations, if we're using an API to pool the information to
read it, or maybe we want to push information to that particular device, then we can use Netcom,
Rascon or Gypsie to do that.
So in that contrast, going on RPG, those are our transports that we can use to interact with the young
data.
So looking at our current communications, we've got the young Yandina that is encapsulated in XML and
then we've got the net current information, which is further encapsulating that, and we can send and
request information to the server, which is going to be our network device.
So our net count was designed as a replacement for S&P, the issues with S&P is various security concerns
there, particularly if it's before S&P version three and S&P is good for reading information.
It's not so good for pushing information to the devices.
So Network was designed as a replacement, really an upgrade for S&P Netcom.
Fignon provide a standardized way to programmatically inspect and modify the configuration of a network
device so young, which standardized in 2010.
It's a data modeling language which provides a standardized way to represent operational and configuration
of a network device.
As you learned earlier, Netcom, which standardized with IETF in 2006.
And it's a protocol that remotely reads or applies changes to the data on the device to that might seem
like it's the wrong way around where Yang actually came after it.
But what happened to the way to work with the data was actually designed first.
So Netcom wasn't really used back in 2006.
It wasn't really usable until Yang came out in 2010.
And Yang was actually originally designed to work with Netcom.
With Netcom, it's mandated the XML coding has to be used and transport is usually over.
S.H. It can also run over time as well.
Looking at the net current political stock, we've got the content, which is the day to be inspected
or changed operations, for example, getting the config or editing the config.
This is initiated by RPG message using XML encoding messages.
You use RPG that stands for remote procedure call RPG simply means Ellery's one system to request another
system to execute code.
And we've got the transport between the client and server.
As I said earlier, supports S.H. or else.
So looking at the protocol stack with Netco we've got to transport.
SSA is also supported.
The messages are using RPG.
We've got the operations, which is the option to perform.
This is the production that we're going to be performing.
And then we've got the actual content.
We've got the body there as well.
OK, moving on.
We've also got restaraunt restaurant kumite later in 2017 and it builds on Netco and it's also an IETF
draft.
It describes how amap a young specification here to a restful interface.
It uses http verbs over a rest API and restaurant is not intended to replace Netcom.
It doesn't have quite as much functionality as Netco, but it is simpler to use and everything Rasht
based nowadays is very popular with our Netco.
It was mandated that it always uses XML, including Rescoring can use XML or Jason.
Jason is seen as easier to read and simpler to work with and to transport is http or https.
So looking at the restaurant protocol stock we've got transport is HTP or yes, we've got our options
to perform our CRUD operations and it's based suich, get pushed, put potch on, don't eat and the
content is going to be X-Mailer or on.
And looking back at that slide I showed you for Netco earlier.
So if this was restaurant that we were using now, it would be Yandina encapsulated in XML or JSON and
then the rest Cohon.
Okay, so moving on from there, we've also got Gypsie.
This is Google RPG.
That's an open source remote procedure code system initially developed by Google in 2015 as well.
It's collecting telemetry statistics.
So if you're in an Internet of Things environment, you've got a lot of devices and you want to collect
a lot of telemetry information from them, then RPG can be a good choice.
GPP, Google Buffer, Google Protocol.
Buffer's encoding is used Roggeveen X-Mailer.
Jason Endre Transport is htp to show for interacting with network devices.
If you're going to use the these, it's going to be most likely Netco, Orascom.
But RPG is also available.
OK, one thing to talk about here is Postman Postman is a super popular tool to test the operation of
APIs.
So Test APIs restaraunt is also testable with Posman because it's based on the same protocols.
Posman can be downloaded as a standalone application or it can be run as a plug in with Postman.
There's a lot of features and functionality in here in post in your collections and environment variables
allow you to easily reuse requests.
So it makes it very convenient to work with requests can be exported as code and multiple programming
languages.
So you can send your requests with porchlight a test of or working.
You check that they are working as you desired directly from Posman.
You can export the code, which you can use in your script.
Again, very convenient.
As well as Posman, you could alternatively use Kerl and Lennix orbit a quest module in Python to test
APIs.
But Posman, because it uses a guey and it's got a lot of added functionality, is the most popular
choice.
And I'll show you how to use it in the next lecture.